Here's some scones and gluten-free bulky things over there.
Oh, yeah.
Thank you. Good mor-
There's a knife
... good afternoon, Glenys. Very good to have you here.
I understand we had some challenges last time, but we're making it work now.
So, look, welcome to the Health Committee.
I'm Sam Atherton, chair of the Health Committee.
We've got you here for 10 minutes to discuss
your submission to us. If you want to leave us time for questions, you
may. If you don't, that's up to you.
But I'll hand that time over to you now. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Glenys Mahoney.
I have 20 years' surgical mesh lived experience,
and am a consumer representative
who has been part of the Surgical Mesh Credentialing and Registry work
program for seven years.
I support the registry.
I'm here today not to oppose it, but to ask a question
I believe the committee needs to consider.
Will the next generation of women receiving treatment for pelvic
floor procedures be able to trust the registry mesh
implantation records and long-term safety information
in the years to come if it proceeds without legislative
foundation?
The New Zealand Australasian Pelvic Floor Registry will record
all pelvic floor procedures, mesh and non-mesh.
It is not collecting data yet, but once it is running, it needs
to accurately record all surgical mesh implanted
detail,
show the true rate of complications in New Zealand,
and identify whether complications relate,
reflect device problems, surgical technique,
or broader system issues.
The key patient safety issue is that the registry
cannot be reliable if every surgeon,
private and public, participates and records the right
information at the time of care.
Mandatory participation is required.
But in private practice, it relies on professional discretion rather than
the same governance used in the public system.
Because missing data can't be added later, this creates a
real risk that the registry may not have the
complete, dependable information women need for safe
care and quality of life in the years ahead.
Right now, the systems are meant to ensure complete reporting
are described as mandatory. But mandatory doesn't
automatically mean safe or reliable.
We do not know if these systems will work every time,
especially in private practice,
or that they can prevent gaps in real time.
A legislative registry is not only about clinicians
reporting data.
It's also about whether government agencies and regulatory
bodies have clear legal responsibilities and can be
held accountable
if they fail to act.
There currently are non-legislative systems that support the
registry, but the real issue is whether they're strong enough to
protect women over time.
Credentialing, the code of rights, funding contracts,
accreditation standards, and the proposed Medical Products
Bill. These all help, but each has limits,
especially for privately funded surgeons, and none can
guarantee complete, consistent
reporting.
For women, this is not a problem
with how the system is run. When data is missing, the
consequences are physical and life-changing
in their ability to work, to care for family, to take
part in everyday life. Women want to get back to
being fully functional members of their community after treatment.
That depends on a system that records what happens to them accurately
every single time.
So my question is this: Will these systems still
hold in the future?
Professional priorities shift. Governments change.
Without legislation as a foundation, is there a risk these
systems soften over time?
A system that relies on goodwill and professional norms
without a legal floor is only as strong as the goodwill
lasts.
We have been here before. We trusted the system.
Women were harmed. Now we're being asked to trust it
again with no legal guarantee that the
data will even be complete.
I have three requests, all centered on what women will need
from the registry, not just now,
but in the future,
when many of today's decision-makers will have moved on and
attentions
may have shifted.
My first request is for assurance about long-term consistency.
Women need confidence that every surgeon, private and
public, will continue to provide complete, accurate
data for every pelvic floor procedure year after year.
The current system relies heavily on professional behavior, and
we need clarity on how Health New Zealand and the
Ministry of Health audits will ensure that full participation
and correct documentation remain consistent over time
My second request
is about accountability,
legally strong.
The systems
we
now have are helpful,
but they're not law.
So if a surgeon doesn't record a mesh implant properly, there's no
legal requirement to make them do it. It's voluntary.
Professional bodies, hospital processes, and government agencies
all play a role,
but none of them have clear legal duties
to ensure complete reporting or to audit it consistently.
If the registry were backed by law, essential actions would become legal
requirements, reporting complications, checking outcomes,
follow up with patients, investigating safety issues, and auditing
the data itself.
That's what creates real, lasting accountability across the whole
system,
not just for individual clinicians.
In simple terms, professional systems rely on goodwill.
Legal systems create obligations.
And for women's safety, we need obligations that last.
My final request is about patient confidence.
Women need to know that the systems supporting the registry and the
accountability behind them are strong enough to protect them, not just today,
but decades from now.
Confidence is part of safety. For women
who may live for years with the consequences of these procedures, the
registry must be built on systems that are durable, enforceable,
and capable of holding every surgeon and health
system agency responsible for oversight, accountable
for accurate documentation over the long term.
In 2016, this committee recommended a
centralized surgical mesh registry.
The government agreed.
Nearly 10 years on, I am simply asking, is the registry
we are building strong enough to last in private and public?
The non-legislative systems could be used now.
But I am asking, do we need a legal foundation beneath them
so the registry cannot be quietly narrowed or abandoned
as priorities change over the years?
I am a consumer,
not a lawyer.
I'm not here to tell the committee what the answer is.
I am here to ask whether we are certain
enough for the woman who will depend on this,
that the answer is yes.
Women's trust
in this registry will depend on whether accountability is real,
durable, and enforceable,
not just assumed through an administrative system.
Their quality of life and treatment depends on it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Glenys. Thank you for your submission.
Do members have questions to raise?
Dr.
Verity.
Thank you, Glenys.
What would the consequence be if
there was legislation saying this register
had to exist and that the end
date
clinician did not put the information in the register?
I'm not really
probably able to answer that. But
obviously there needs to be processes
within
the appropriate channels,
because it's very important for a woman to
have that information if complications occur.
Mm-hmm.
Dr.
Campbell.
Excellent. Thank-
We're running out of time.
Okay, I'll be very quick. Excellent. Thank you, Glenys.
If we were going to summarize
your request is that there is a registry in place, but you're
concerned that because it's not in legislation that
it's not going to have the same effect.
We do have a number of registries which would probably fit into that same
boat. Just off the top of my head, probably stroke, cardiac, the
joint registry. There's probably others.
Why do you think that mesh in itself will be
different to some of these other disease or clinical
registries that we already have that are not
legislated for?
Because of the known harm that it's caused, and it's
internationally not really known the extent of
harm.
Glenys, can I just check that your previous answer to me is in
part an answer to Dr. Campbell? Because one of the things
is it's not just a set of clinical data, it's
also like product tracing-
Yes
... so that someone can know what was done.
Mm-hmm. Mind you, that would also be like the joint
registry.
Correct.
It's like two registries in one, because it's gonna
record a product, but it's also gonna look at
quality and safety of care.
And outcomes, I assume.
Yes.
All right.
Thank you, Glenys. Thank you for making yourself available to the committee and for
your submission and for taking
some questions. We
greatly appreciate it. Thank you.
We'll move back to...
Is this in person or Zoom?
Zoom.
Oh, sorry.
Hmm.
Hello, Jason. Very good to have you here from the DISC Trust.
I'm Sam Affendich, chair of the committee.
Just to make you aware, the rules of Parliament mean that when hearing your
submission, we have to be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage
a person's reputation. Generally, please don't name other
people, make serious allegations against named or identifiable
people, or include specific or detailed information about the
circumstances of an overdose.
On that note, we have you here for 10 minutes.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may.
I will hand that time over to you now. Thank you.
Thank you.
Tena koutou katoa. My name is Jason George, and I'm appearing
on behalf of DISC Trust, where I am the national harm reduction
lead.
I've worked in harm reduction for a little over 20 years,
including alongside people who inject and use drugs in overdose prevention,
naloxone access, drug checking,
and various other harm reduction measures.
DISC Trust strongly supports the
Drug Overdose Assistance Protection Legislation Bill.
The central purpose is simple. When someone may be overdosing,
people should seek emergency help immediately without fear that doing so
will expose them or others to avoidable legal consequences.
Laws of this kind are an important harm reduction measure to
reduce preventable overdose deaths.
Comparable Good Samaritan overdose laws are now in place in every
state of the United States as well as in Canada.
They recognize a basic public health principle.
In a possible overdose,
preserving life must come before fear of punishment.
This bill gives New Zealand the opportunity to put that same principle
clearly into law.
I want to explain why this bill matters from a firsthand overdose response
experience.
Some years ago,
a friend experienced an overdose situation at their flat in the
same residential complex where I lived.
In a panic,
rather than immediately calling 111,
they came approximately two minutes away to my place,
banged on the door,
and
in a very panicked state, asked for help.
I
hurried to the flat with them
and assessed the situation and concluded that emergency medical
assistance was going to be needed.
This was a serious overdose. The person was clearly struggling
to breathe, and
it wasn't a situation that could be left.
It was before naloxone was widely available in New Zealand.
So there was a discussion
about whether to
call 111 immediately or to move the person
to
outside to a car park,
to some location away
from the flat, but
where assistance could be provided without fear of the
person whose residence it was getting in trouble with the police
for drugs that were there, utensils, and
a small number of cannabis plants.
I called 111. It was eventually agreed that 111 would be called,
and
the
ambulance would be called to the flat without moving the person.
But time was wasted while this was debated.
I called 111 and began CPR.
While I was doing that,
other person or people at the scene
cleaned up drugs, paraphernalia, hid the three or four cannabis
plants that were there in wardrobes, and removed drugs from the person who
had overdosed, all because they were worried about legal consequences.
Those actions were understandable in the context of fear
of prosecution, but they were not the actions needed in the moment.
The person needed everyone's attention and assistance.
It was very difficult managing an overdose sort of that
overdose assistance with a larger person
essentially solo while everyone else
cleaned up the scene.
Eventually, after what seemed like an eternity, ambulance staff arrived and took
over, administered multiple doses of naloxone and eventually
oxygen, and transported the person to hospital.
They survived, but critical time had been lost, and it was a
fortunate and very lucky outcome that could have easily gone differently.
That experience made a lasting impression on me.
The danger was not only the overdose itself.
The danger was also the hesitation, uncertainty, and fear of police
involvement that diverted people from seeking help and assisting the
person in front of them. My experience with this
experience is not isolated. Over many years working alongside peers
and people who use drugs, I have heard repeated accounts of people being moved
into car parks, taken to phone boxes, or simply left and dumped
during overdose situations because those present feared arrest or police
involvement. Those actions can turn an already dangerous overdose into a
fatal one Moving an unconscious person can delay care and create further
risk. Leaving someone alone means there may be nobody to call for health,
administer naloxone, provide CPR, or tell responders what they may have
taken. These are not decisions people make because they do not care.
They are decisions made in panic, fear, and uncertainty about what will
happen if the police become involved.
This is why the bill matters.
It should create enough certainty that when someone may be dying, people
call 111 immediately, stay with them, give first aid or
naloxone where they can, if necessary, and provide responders with accurate
information. Nobody should be deciding whether to move an unresponsive
person, hide drugs, remove paraphernalia, conceal plants,
or leave someone alone before calling for help.
This bill is not blanket immunity.
It is not a license for serious offending, exploitation, violence,
or organized commercial drug dealing.
It is a targeted public health measure designed to remove a barrier to life-saving
assistance in an emergency.
DISC's submission calls for strong and unambiguous protections.
In support of that position, I encourage the committee to consider two practical
refinements.
First, the protections should clearly extend to non-commercial
supply agreements, including social sharing, as outlined in the bill.
In real life, drugs are not always obtained or distributed in a legally neat way.
Friends may pool money, purchase together, share a substance, ask
someone else to obtain it for them, or have one person obtain drugs and
distribute them among a small group without making a profit.
These situations can fall outside a narrow understanding of social
sharing, even though they are not commercial dealing.
A person should not hesitate to call an ambulance because they fear that obtaining
drugs for friends, passing drugs on, or being connected to how the
drugs were
obtained will automatically be treated as supply outside the protection.
The distinction should also be whether there is evidence of commercial dealing,
profit-making, exploitation, or organized distribution.
Where there is no such evidence, non-commercial supply arrangements should be
explicitly protected.
Second, the committee should review the two-plant cultivation threshold.
In the situation I have described, plants were hidden because people feared
consequences of them being seen. A very low threshold may leave
non-commercial growers uncertain about whether the protection applies.
In this case,
there were more plants, about three or four, I believe, that would have fallen
outside the protection offered. But there was no commercial element
to those plants being grown.
Passing the bill is essential, but people also need to know that the
protection exists. DISC supports clear public information for people who use
drugs, whanau, peers, emergency services, police, health
providers, and community organizations.
The message should be simple: someone may be overdosing, call 111,
stay with them, provide assistance if you can, and tell responders what they need
to know.
DISC also supports monitoring and evaluations so the impact of the
legislation on emergency help-seeking, overdose outcomes, and
engagements with services can be understood over time.
DISC Trust urges the committee to recommend that the bill proceed.
It is a practical and humane measure that places preservation of life
above punitive responses in a medical emergency.
The key test is simple: when someone may be overdosing, does the law make
it easier for people to call for help immediately?
Strong, clear, and workable protections will do that.
I welcome any questions, and thank you for your time.
Thank you, Jason. We have just over a minute left for
questions. Very good submission, thank you.
And up to members, Ingrid Leary.
Yeah, thanks for your submission.
Totally understand why you are making the distinction between personal use and
commercial use. If we think about the person who might be on the premises
purchasing from a dealer, who then suffers a medical event, they're going to be
less protected. Do you think practically what will happen is
dealers will no longer enable that on their premises, or how are you going to
safeguard those people from not being excluded by this protection?
Well, I think
there is a
risk that,
as it's written, that they will be excluded.
I think
perhaps
the
committee could consider whether
there's a way of implementing in the law something around the scale of
whether there's evidence of a sort of
commercial scale operation or whether
it's a lower sort of level
supply.
Perhaps without any firm evidence of that, the protections should
probably apply.
All right.
Thank you, Jason. We are at time. Appreciate your time and
making yourself available for us, for the committee today. Kia ora.
Thank you.
All right.
We will move on to our next submitter, which is Sam
Allen. Sam,
welcome to the Health Committee. Just to read you some rules that we
have. The rules of Parliament mean that when you're hearing your submission, we
have to be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage a person's
reputation. Generally, please don't name other people,
make serious allegations against named or identifiable people, or
include specific or detailed information about the circumstances of an
overdose. We have you here for five minutes.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may.
I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you
Awesome. Kia ora koutou. Ko Sam toku ingoa.
No Ōtutahi ahau.
So what I'm going to do is firstly, I'm going to briefly touch on my submission,
and then I'll hopefully leave multiple minutes for time, and if there isn't people
with questions, I'll extend on my submission.
What my submission tried to explain is coming from the
perspective in both an unpartisan way, but also for someone that
doesn't drink or do drugs, is that prosecution does not happen
regardless of this legislation, and therefore, the only risk is
people's perception of a risk of prosecution.
And therefore, the only impacts which accrue are those to health,
and therefore this legislation should pass.
I think what is important here is that we take the nuance out of people's
thoughts. The message can be clear, it can be simple, and that is just to
ring 111. I think the time that people pause to
think is incredibly important, right?
If you're someone that has taken these substances
or you're just incredibly worried about your friends,
people might think about whether they're betraying them.
They just perceive the risk to be very high because they are not
sober, and therefore the law is able to give them certainty that they don't need
to, in a panic, make these decisions.
And I think we're starting to see the kind of benefits of this certainty come
through at university, which I currently study at.
Even though I don't use drugs, people that do are starting to do things like get
them checked. And instead of worrying about, "Oh,
am I able to do this in a safe way?" Because the law is clear, people are
willing to engage in that. I've got a wee bit more to
extend on, but I'm happy to take questions before then, because there's fully time.
All right.
All right. I'll ask a question then.
Chung, Chung.
Just now you talk about the perception and then people taking
drugs shouldn't be worried about the safety stuff.
I think my message is, you shouldn't be the main messages about stopping people
taking drugs at the beginning. Rather than they should be thinking
about, "Oh yeah, it's safe to take drugs.
It's safe to overdose." Don't you think it's a wrong messages to our young people?
I think that's completely inaccurate to the way that this message is likely to be
portrayed because if you had a magic solution to stop
people from taking drugs, I think you'd probably be a very popular
parliamentarian if you were able to be the person that ended people
consuming drugs. But obviously this isn't the case, right?
People get addicted, people engage socially.
We've had the Misuse of Drugs Act since the 1980s, and people still do it.
What I think is important here is that the people that do engage in
this message is just the idea of ringing 111.
It isn't to say drugs are safe because obviously if you're considering an overdose,
it is very unsafe. So I think that kind of messaging would go to say that
potentially if we just didn't let people
seek help, that would be good because it would mean that therefore we'd send this
really clear message to not take drugs.
I think we just need to reckon with the reality that
currently people take drugs when we have the kind of messages
you support. I think that it is unlikely people see the
potential for an ambulance to be called faster and think that
it's fine. I think that the other submissions
explain that
people do worry about this, and
as my submission explains,
by the time an overdose has occurred, people have already made the
decision to take drugs, and I think to not support this bill, you
would therefore need to explain why, prior to people taking the drugs,
people then considered the ambulance availability, which I
think is incredibly speculative to believe.
All right. Do other members have questions?
No, but I do just want to acknowledge Sam for your submission.
Kia ora.
Good to see you again.
Good to see you as well.
And thank you for engaging in the process.
Sam was
Hamish's-
Youth MP
... Youth MP.
Excellent. All right, Sam. Hey, thank you very much for
your submission and for turning up here and submitting in front of us today.
Awesome. Ngā mihi koutou.
Thank you.
Who do we have now?
Kahu Rangi Carter, MP. Yeah.
Round two. How's our technology going?
It's tight today. Great. Excellent.
Hey, Kahu, good to have you up on stage.
We've got you here for 15 minutes. You've already heard the
rules around sensitive personal information, so I won't read those to you
again.
If you want to leave us time for questions, of course you may.
You have 15 minutes. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you
to the committee for having me here and to all of the people who have taken the
time to submit on this bill.
Today, I'm speaking to my member's bill, the Drug Overdose
Assistance Protection Legislation, commonly known around
the world as the Good Samaritan Law, because it
protects people who call for help when someone is in
need of life-saving medical assistance.
It takes a harm reduction approach to drug overdoses and drug
use,
and we want to remove any barriers to people
accessing life-saving care
and further support because no one
should ever die of a drug overdose.
We want people to call for help even when they are in
doubt.
Before we look into the details of my Good Samaritan Law, I would like
to thank the members of the Health Select Committee for your interest
in the law and acknowledge how the member's bill
process has worked so well this term.
We have seen members' bills from all across the house proceed
through the first reading, like my colleague, and Deputy
Speaker, Teanau Tuiono's Samoan citizenship bill
passing earlier this term. And having a bill
drawn from the biscuit tin is exciting for staff
and MPs, and I want to acknowledge all the MPs
and staff who have diligently and inquisitively worked to
strengthen and understand laws that can help the people of
Aotearoa, New Zealand.
This bill, the Good Samaritan Bill, was pulled just a
couple of weeks after being put in the biscuit tin.
Some might say we've got some guardian angels blessing this bill.
As a first-term MP, it's been encouraging and really cool to see
strong democracy in real time, where politicians
work together to make laws that make our country
safer for everyone.
The Good Samaritan laws around the world introduce
legal protections for people who assist someone in the event of a
drug overdose or serious unexpected reaction
to drugs.
This law would make a narrow change to the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1975, that
sits with the Ministry of Health, the Bail Act
2000, and the Parole Act 2002 to
ensure that when someone calls for
life-saving help during a suspected drug overdose
or serious adverse reaction, they will not be
charged for specified low-level drug
offenses like having or using drugs
for personal use, having drug utensils, enabling
premises for low-level offending or
non-commercial social supply,
breaching parole conditions relating to drug use,
recognizing the heightened overdose risk after
leaving prison.
I want to make it clear to every member
and the public, this bill does not protect
dealing or serious crime. It is about ensuring that if
someone needs medical assistance,
they get that help.
Coroner's findings have found over and over again that hesitation
to call for help driven by the fear of getting in trouble with
the law is a contributing factor in fatal
overdoses. We want to unequivocally
make it clear when someone is in need of life-saving
care, that they will not be in trouble with the law,
and the person calling for help will not be.
In 2025, the New Zealand Drug Foundation
survey found that 39% of people at
risk of drug harm would be worried to call
111 for help if someone was experiencing a drug
overdose.
39%.
And a recent Victoria University survey found that
over 50% of students knew
someone who had overdosed on drugs.
I'm a mum,
and my kids are the most precious things in the world to me.
My kids are 17 and 18, nearly 18 and 19, and my
daughter is planning to go away to uni next year.
If they or someone they know was ever in a
situation like this,
I would want any of the barriers to that life-saving
care to be removed, and that is what this bill is
aiming to do.
We know drug harm is increasing in Aotearoa,
and there are scary toxic drugs hitting our shores, and we
have to make sensible drug laws to
reduce harm and deaths from overdoses.
People often take drugs without knowing it has dangerous
additives or is something different to what they
expected. And I want to remind all of the members
that it may be the first time
somebody ever tries a drug that an
overdose occurs.
I first learned that people were dying in New Zealand
unnecessarily to treatable, avoidable drug overdoses
when I read the recommendations from the New Zealand Drug Foundation, and
I want to mahi to them for this mahi.
And their recommendations had the aim of reducing drug harm in
our communities with sensible laws.
I was shocked to read that almost three people a week,
yes, three people a week die of
treatable accidental drug overdoses in
Aotearoa, New Zealand. I was floored and wanted to learn more
about it, and it became clear that the Good Samaritan law
was common sense, and because similar laws
overseas have proven to reduce harm, I thought that
this would be
an awesome member's bill. It's not often we get the
chance to save lives with our member's bills.
Evidence and data supports it, and
I know that it can be supported across the house.
When I spoke to mothers and whanau of
people who had lost children to treatable drug
overdoses, I knew it was something that I wanted to shepherd through to
law.
Arriving to a fatal overdose is horrific for
police, other first responders, the people at the
scene And the loss and grief will be felt
by families and friends forever.
This law can prevent those tragedies from ever happening.
The most effective versions of Good Samaritan laws are those that
protect the person experienced, the overdose, as well as the people who are on
the scene.
I know that many of you here today are parents, and
though we might not agree on what drugs should be legal,
I hope we can all agree that if someone is overdosing on
drugs, that they should get
critical life-saving care. There's no typical
drug user in New Zealand. People of all ages from all backgrounds
and regions take drugs. This law follows similar
laws internationally, like Canada and Australia, which have reduced
deaths by almost 10% over a couple of years,
and if replicated in New Zealand, could save up to 19
to 29 lives per year.
And that is what we are doing here today. That is what this bill is about.
Overdoses don't wait for a moral argument about whether people
should take drugs or not. We must remove barriers to people
getting life-saving medical care. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Kahurangi. We have time for questions. Dr. Verall.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks for your presentation, Kahu.
Do you support the Drug Foundation's
recommendations for
changes to the bill?
There is a lot more that we could do with this bill.
It is really important that we, as a committee, go
through the recommendations from the Drug Foundation, from the Law Commission, and
get advice from
our advisors, from the Ministry of Health, because
we want to make this law as
good as possible so that we do save those lives.
Ingrid.
I just wonder if you could talk through the fact that we have
cases in New Zealand where people have experienced effective overdose on
alcohol. What is the difference as you see it between that kind
of situation and another?
We know that the number one
cause of deaths
from drugs is due to alcohol in New Zealand.
And we want to make sure that
we have sensible alcohol reform laws as well
as
other laws like the Good Samaritan law that
can make sure that
people unequivocally know
that they can call for help.
Sorry. I probably wasn't clear in my question.
If you've got two cases-
Mm
... under the law as it currently stands-
Mm-hmm
... somebody who has imbibed alcohol and effectively overdoses on
it-
Thank you
... would probably not have reluctance to call
services. How does that sit with you given the alternative drugs
and what scenarios play out there?
Thank you for clarifying the question.
If people need life-saving care, they should get it.
That is what this bill is about. And
in most instances where people
call for life-saving care or save a life,
they're considered a hero, whether it's helping somebody who
is having a terrible reaction to alcohol
poisoning or saving somebody who is drowning.
They're considered a hero, and we want that to be the case for this law here.
And I want to remind all the members that this is a narrow law
change.
It's not going to save the world, but it might save some
lives, and I think that is worthwhile, and I really do
appreciate everybody taking the time to really dig into
this law to make sure that it is fit for purpose
as it goes out into the public.
Thank you. Carlos.
When you keep mentioning this law is happening internationally,
which country are you refer to?
So we have the USA, Australia, Canada, many
countries, and like previous submitters have said,
there's many comparable countries who have Good Samaritan laws.
Because actually, I do my research.
The only one actually have the real legislation is Canada.
Even US, there are only certain state have the law, not
every single state in US. And other country you refer to,
it's only taking a part of it, not actually setting the legislation.
Are you agree with that?
What we do know, and thank you for doing that research and looking into it.
What we do know is that countries that have
Good Samaritan laws that protect the person
experiencing the overdose and those calling for help and on the
scene are the most effective. And the reason, there's many
reasons, but the key thing here is that at the moment,
people are not calling for help when someone needs life-saving
care. That is what we are doing here, and that's what this
legislation is wanting to do.
So do you agree with me that this law is not actually a legislation in some of the
country you mentioned?
It is, and we can send that to you-
Only Canada and US
... at a later date. I can send it to you afterwards.
All right.
And also, these are great questions to have for our
advisors who will be able to dig into that data.
I have done written parliamentary questions to, for
example, the Minister for Police,
but they were not able to provide some of that data that I was
looking for. So it'll be great to get those officials in.
One more question. Can you confirm that the only country actually
having the similar legislation, which is Canada and US, are the
coming number one and two in worldwide for drug being use?
For what, sorry?
For drug usage. For illegal drugs usage, they're coming first and
second in the world. Can you confirm that?
I can't confirm that right now, and this is-
I can tell you they are
... about-
Based on the report
... this is about-
Yes, they are
I can see you're, you're making a moral-
Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Point of order.
Point of order, Hon Clare Curran.
Dr. Chung's questions are based on some assumptions, and I get
that he's-
Sorry, it's not a, assumption on the report .
Yeah, I-
Speaking
... but we haven't clarified the situation.
I think the member has answered that question, and then there's a follow-up
question that assumes the veracity of the information that Dr.
Chung gave. It might be a better question to come after we've had official advice.
Thank you. And-
Speaking to the point of order.
Point of order, Carl Leong.
I think this is not assumption. There's public release.
There's a lot of research. US and Canada actually are coming first and second.
I think the member of the opposite, they should do their homework before they
actually comment that I make assumption.
Uh,
I can see that this is a topic that we're all really passionate about,
and I want to remind the members that this, we can
have a moral argument about
which country takes the most drugs and why.
What this legislation is doing is ensuring that
our young people, that anybody across Aotearoa
who needs life-saving care,
is not scared to call for help.
We can have a conversation about-
Yeah, sure
... the morals of further things later.
But in this legislation, we want to
make sure that this narrow law
change, which could save lives and was brought to Parliament
by
moms, and whanau, and people with lived experience who
have lived with the heartache and pain of losing a loved one,
have the time here to be heard by
our lawmakers, by us-
Thank you, Kahurangi
... and make a law that works for the people of Aotearoa.
Thank you, Kahurangi. I'm sure we can explore a number of those
points as we go on.
Like, I think-
Thank you
... for members, if they say things in here, we assume them to be honorable
and take them at their word.
So-
Thank you so much
... thank you very much for your submission and presentation to the committee
today.
Appreciate
it.
Okay. We'll move back to private session